meeting of NOVEMBER 28, 2023.
Please stand by for the san
francisco board of supervisors
meeting of NOVEMBER 28, 2023.
>> good afternoon and welcome
to the meeting for tuesday
NOVEMBER 28, 2023.
Please call the roll.
>> [Roll call] MR. PRESIDENT,
all members are present.
>> thank you MADAM Clerk.
The san francisco board of
supervisors we acknowledge that
we are on the unceded ancestral
homeland of the ramaytush
ohlone who are the original
inhabitants of the san
francisco peninsula. As the
indigenous stewards of this
land and in accordance with
their traditions, the ramaytush
ohlone have never ceded, lost
nor forgotten their
responsibilities as the
caretakers of this place, as
well as for all peoples who
reside in their traditional
territory. As guests, we
recognize that we benefit from
living and working on their
traditional homeland. We wish
to pay our respects by
acknowledging the ancestors and
relatives of the ramaytush
community and by affirming
their sovereign rights as first
peoples. Colleagues, please
join me in the pledge of
allegiance.
>> I pledge allegiance to the
flag of the united states of
america, and to the republic,
for which it stands, one
nation, under GOD, indivisible,
with liberty and justice for
all.
>> MADAM Clerk, do we any
communications?
>> the board welcomes all
persons to attend in person
here in the legislative
chamber, room 250, second floor
in city hall.
This meeting is airing live on
sfgovtv channel 26 or view the
live stream at www.Sfgovtv.Org.
As an alternative to being
present you MAY submit public
comment in writing by e-mail to
bos@sfgov.Org or send via U.S.
postal service to the san
francisco board of supervisors,
the number 1 DR. Carlton b
goodlett place, city hall, room
244 in san francisco california
94102.
If you need to request a
reasonable accommodation under
the american's with disability
act or you need to request
language assistance, you need
to contact the clerk's office
at least 48 business hours in
advance of the meeting by
calling 415-554-5184.
Our office will make every
effort to accommodate all
requests.
Thank you MR. PRESIDENT, that
concludes communications.
>> thank you MADAM Clerk.
Colleagues we have a motion to
approve the minutes of OCTOBER
17 and OCTOBER 24, 2023?
Motion made by supervisor
walton, seconded by supervisor
mandelman.
On that motion made and
seconded, MADAM Clerk, a roll
call, please.
>> on the minutes, dorsey, aye.
Engardio, aye.
Mandelman, aye.
Melgar, aye.
Peskin, aye.
Preston, aye.
Ronan, aye.
Safai, aye.
Stefani, aye.
Walton, aye.
Chan, aye.
There are 11I ayes.
>> motion approved.
Please call consent agenda.
>> items 1-17 are consent and
considered to be retune.
If a member objects a item MAY
be removed and considered
separately.
>> seeing no names on the
roster, take same house same
call, the ordinances finally
passed on first reading and
resolutions adopted.
Next item, please.
>> item 18 is third draft of
charter amendment to amend the
charter of city and county of
san francisco to define full
duty sworn offices to establish
minimum staffing level for
sworn officer of the police
department.
>> supervisor safai and so far
you are the sponsor of this
charter amendment, the one late
charter amendment to be
considered today, I will call
on you first.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin.
Thank you colleagues.
There is a lot of consternation
around this measure, not
exactly clear why.
There has been some
misinformation promoted about
this measure, and to be honest,
I didn't think I would be
standing here today as the
sponsor of this measure.
This measure evolved in a way I
think is healthy what debate we
need to have in san francisco,
but I want to go back to things
I said in committee, having
served on the budget committee
for the past three years, first
under chair haney, then chair
ronan and now chair chan, this
is and will be the most
difficult budget that I faced
in seven years on the board of
supervisors.
We are approaching at least
right now they say a half
billion dollar deficit.
They anticipate it growing to 7
or $800 million and last year
we had people coming to our
chamber talking about food
security, programs being cut.
We had children people carrying
babies, child care providers
talking about the threat of
their programs being cut.
We had senior programs after
school programs, we had many
different vital and core
services in our city on the
chopping block and that was
with a quarter of billion
dollar budget deficit.
We are now facing over a half
billion dollar budget deficit
and that is a fact and it is
continuing to grow.
When this charter amendment was
proposed, the conversation
revolved around how we would
one, increase the minimum
number of officers that have
declined over the last five
years and now how are we going
to creatively recruit and get
more people back in potentially
through recruitment fund.
Let me say this, and again,
serving on the budget committee
serves us well in this
conversation.
We tomorrow at the budget
committee will hear a request
from the department of public
health to take $39.5 million
from funded unfilled positions
and convert that into overtime.
Those positions are
predominantly nurses and nurses
assistants that have not been
hired or filled in the city and
county of san francisco.
When you go to laguna honda and
when you go to the emergency
room at sf general, we are down
emergency room nurses.
When you call 911 in this city
right now, we are only meeting
the required response time, 70
percent of the time.
71 percent of the time to be
exact.
Because we are down 30 to 40,
911 call operators.
We are down sheriffs, we are
down paramedics, we are down
mental health technicians, we
are down firefighters and yes
we are down police officers.
If we are going to have a
conversation about public
safety in the city, we need to
talk about all aspects of
public safety that includes all
of the people on the front
lines in this position.
I am not prepared to get into a
conversation of pitting peter
against paul or taking money
from one area of the government
and shifting over to the other
without a true funding source
and that is the responsibility
of this body to be thoughtful,
to be responsible and to think
about all aspects of government.
I understand over the last
couple years people are very
concerned about public safety
and they should be, but it
needs to be approached in
healthy thoughtful way.
We made a amendment, that
amendment said from the
original charter there needs to
be a identified source of
funding and that includes going
and modifying an existing tax
and looking for a way to pay
for this in a thoughtful way.
But I think when we do that and
that would be a second step,
not included in this proposal,
that's when we should have a
real conversation about all
aspects of public safety in
when we are approaching a full
conversation.
I want to thank all of the
individuals that have been
involved in the conversation.
i want to thank supervisor
dorsey for moving the
conversation forward, but I
will say, the idea when things
are amended, that is a normal
process and the legislative
process.
That is a normal part of what
we do in this body and that
happened time and time again
and so I think the end result
we have here is one that is
doing two things.
It is changing the conversation
around minimum police staffing
which I think is a good thing
and secondarily saying we need
to be fiscally responsible and
identify a sort of funding and
do it in a thoughtful way, so
colleagues I ask for your
support on this today.
I think that there is a lot
more room for conversation.
I hope supervisor dorsey and I
can come together and continue
to work on this as we have on
other things in this body, and
I think that all of us will be
better served by the end result.
Thank you MR. PRESIDENT.
>> thank you supervisor safai.
Supervisor engardio.
>> thank you.
I want to explain why I will be
voting no on this measure.
I have been a strong advocate
for funding and hiring more
police officers.
We face a police staffing
crisis and short hundreds of
officers for a city our size.
I need to explain why I'm
voting no a measure on its face
looks like a measure to fund
and hire more police officers.
This measure does nothing
concrete to fund and hire
police.
It is aspirational.
it doesn't set aside funds in
the budget, it only suggests
reallocating money from current
taxes that are volatile and
inconsistent income.
This measure is merely
aspirational because it is not
a new dedicated tax.
It refers to the possibility of
using a unnamed tax in the
future and that raises legal
concerns for me.
Taxes that pay for specific
things require 2/3 majority.
Simple majority are easier to
pass, but can the next pay for
something specific by police?
Our city has been sued in the
past over these very questions.
In short, this measure is messy
and it doesn't do anything to
immediately fund and hire
police.
We need to scrap this measure,
start over, take the politics
out of it and work together to
give san francisco residents
what they are begging for,
better public safety.
Better public safety starts
with funding and hiring more
police officers.
It also includes more sheriff
deputies and first responders
like paramedics and 911
operators.
Let's talk about 911 operators.
They are underpaid and stressed
to the max and leaving in
droves.
We can all have the police
officers in the world but what
is the point if we don't have
essential workers answering the
phone when residents have have
a emergency?
>> this measure is messy
because it started as one
thing, a set aside for police
fundjug became another thing
which doesn't dedicate any
definitive funding.
A lot of politic s happened and
this measure has become the
political footple football for
the upcoming election year.
Some politicians will win and
some will lose but for
residents of san francisco it
is all a loss.
We can't play politics in
public safety.
Include 911 operators and
police officers and first
responders to create a public
safety set aside for for the
NOVEMBER ballot.
There are basic residents
expect city hall to cover.
A fully staffed police
department and 911 call center
is as basic as it gets.
Without public safety, nothing
else matters.
Put the politics aside and do
the work our constitch tuents
are demanding.
>> supervisor ronan.
>> thank you.
I have to say I'm a little
confused now.
Mostly by the sponsor's speech.
So, I have a couple of
questions maybe for the city
attorney or for the controller
or for the author.
As I read this measure, it
would appear that any future
revenue measure that we would
put on the ballot would pass.
That it would first have to go
to fund a minimum amount of
police before the revenue could
be used for anything else.
Am I reading that correctly?
>> deputy city attorney ann
pearson.
The measure includes the term,
the full und ifing gate and
that is a date when certain
parts of the charter amendment
would become operative and the
full funding date is defined as
the date when the controller
certifies that the voters
passed a tax measure that
dedicate funding for this
purpose or will increase
funding sufficient to cover the
cost of this.
When that date happens, the
funding requirements of this
charter amendment will go into
effect, so when that date
happens the city would be
required to appropriate funds
consistent with this and
deposit money into the fund.
>> so in plain language because
that is how I read it as well.
What that means is that any new
revenue measure that goes on
the ballot first has to be used
to fund minimum staffing for
police before it could be fund
anything else?
>> I don't think that is
exactly right.
There could be a revenue
measure that is specific tax
earmarked for something else.
>> for a specific tax, but a
general tax?
>> if there is a general tax
that doesn't raise sufficient
revenue to cover these costs
that would not trigger, but if
there is a general tax that in
the controller estimation
generates enough revenue to
cover the cost of this ballot
measure, it would trigger these
requirements.
>> so, if there is another
pandemic we wouldn't be able to
raise general revenue to cover
health cost or housing or
healthcare or anything else?
If it was enough a general tax
to cover the minimum
staffing -- this is the worst
written piece of legislation I
think I've seen in 15 years on
this board.
That's unbelievable.
We are tying our hands in the
future, which means that unless
we specifically want to raise
revenue to hire police why even
try?
No matter what is happening.
No matter if there is a
pandemic or homeless crisis
gets worse, no matter if there
is a staffing crisis in any
other profession and both of my
colleagues just named about a
dozen where we have minimum
staffing and I have to agree
with supervisor engardio, this
is a mess of a piece of
legislation because it started
as something completely
different which by the way I
would have been against as
well, but it started as
something completely different
and has meshed into not nothing
but something that ties our
hands and can prohibit us from
achieving true public safety in
the future.
You gave a speech supervisor
safai all about the fact public
safety requires many things.
It does require police, but it
also requires mental health
counselors and housing for the
homeless and drug treatment
programs, and economic
development programs.
All of these things together is
what makes public safety.
Correct me if I'm wrong,
colleagues, but didn't just 3
years ago PRESIDENT Norman yee
put something on the ballot to
not put arbitrary numbers in
the charter to staff at any
level?
we just did that.
It passed with incredible
support from the publux because
it doesn't make sense to put
random numbers that represent a
specific moment in time in our
city consitution.
That's why we elect leaders to
make judgment calls about how
to use limited funds in a
specific period of time when
the city is a complicated place
facing many challenges and to
divide those funds as
appropriate at a particularly
given time.
Yes, we have set asides because
we decide some things are so
important that we should always
fund them, and I understand
that there was a effort to do
that at first, but what we have
here makes absolutely zero
sense to me.
I'll also just have to say and
why I would have opposed
supervisor dorsey's original
measure as well, since 2017
this board has increased sfpd
funding by over $200 million.
Just this year alone sfusd came
to us and asked for $60 million
increase to their budget, $25
million budget supplemental to
pay for overtime cost and a new
mou with their union for $166
million over three years to
fund recruitment and retention
bonus we gave it to them.
The past two years when sfpd
and the mayor came to us with a
budget for police, we gave ever
cent they asked for.
Yes, police are important to
public safety.
They dont make public safety.
They are important component to
insure public safety and we
understood the department has
been under-staffed for some
time so this board and this
mayor have supported all the
efforts to recruit new
officers, to hire new officers,
to pay competitive rates.
We have done that and haven't
said no for over two years and
in fact we said yes to a
massive increase just a few
days ago.
Just a few years ago we took
arbitrary numbers out of the
charter when it comes to police
staffing, because we decided it
didn't make sense and it passed
with you know, incredible
support.
Now we have this non-sensical
ballot measure that creates a
fund that we might be forced to
put money into if we put a
revenue tax on the ballot.
As someone who supported every
new revenue measure and every
new tax against the rich has
that been on the ballot I would
not support that measure with
this in place because what you
are saying is that money will
go straight to the cops!
When people are starving in the
street.
The lecture or introduction
that supervisor safai gave, I
agreed with everything he had
to say.
That is precisely why I'm not
supporting the measure.
This makes so sense colleagues
and hope you will join
supervisor engardio and me for
completely different reasons to
say no to this horrible mess of
a piece of legislation.
>> supervisor dorsey.
>> thank you.
Colleagues I don't believe
there is a single issue more
important to san francisco
residents and businesses today
then public safety and I don't
believe there is a single
factor more consequential to
making progress on those public
safety challenges then
fulfilling the promise of a
fully staffed police department.
Last month when the police
department presented to this
board, we heard sobering
numbers.
1/3 of the police department
supposed to be in san francisco
isn't there right now.
We are on pace to lose another
300 police officers who are
eligible for full retirement
right now.
A police commander described
this situation as potentially
catastrophic and the thing
about what we are trying to
deal with here is that much of
what we are facing in police
under-staffing as a crisis
isn't unique to san francisco
and in fact this is a nation
wide phenomenon.
Much is demographic issue that
owes to bill clinton running
for PRESIDENT In 1992 and
making commitments we put a
hundred thousand cops on the
street and it was 125 thousand
cops.
It turns out also police
officers will retire.
This was a foreseeable crisis
we probably should have been
doing more to solve sooner then
we did, but the fact is right
now we are not competing as
effectively against other
jurisdictions in northern
california as we could be and
that's why I was working on a
charter amendment for most of
this year and I appreciate
everybody whether we agree or
not, I appreciate the spirit of
cooperation about addressing
this issue and trying to
address some of the things that
I think 1994 charter amendment
got wrong that supervisor ronan
talked about.
I agree, we shouldn't have a
arbitrary number in the charter
that stays there forever and
think there was a right move,
prop e in 2020 to amend that.
What I wanted to do in the
charter amendment we are
proposing before it was
hijacked was to have a process
for how we could have a minimum
staffing level that is adjusted
over time.
But, it turns out that there
was a hostile amendment offered.
This is now not a police
staffing measure, this now has
a contingency in it that it
will not take effect unless and
until "a future tax measure
passed by the voters" is
"generate sufficient general
revenue to recruit and hire
more police.".
The notion san franciscans can
only expect a fully staffed
police department if they are
willing to pay extra for it in
my view is a marketing gimmick
worthy of spirit airlines and
not something a responsible
city government should be doing.
I believe that voters deserve
the agency because it is there
dollars to prioritize police
staffing for just a five year
period to get us from a
historic low of something like
700 cops short to a fully
staffed police department in a
way that won't break the bank
that had the support of the
mayor budget also, the mayor
policy director, mayor, former
chief of police, current chief
of police.
We are a city that is too
invested in being safe and
clean and welcoming to our
residents and our businesses,
to commuters to tourists and
convention airs.
This is a vices we cannot
afford not to solve.
I think voters deserve the
agency to prioritize that.
I'm disappointed they won't get
it.
What they will get instead is a
cop tax scream and will say
this, I don't this can this is
something that will go over
well with voters.
I think this is going to be an
election where people want
solutions on public safety and
I don't think they are getting
it with the measure as amended,
so I will be opposing it.
I know we will have people from
different perspectives MAY
agree on this, but I hope you
join me in voting no.
Thank you.
>> thank you supervisor dorsey.
MR. Controller, sorry to put
you on the spot and this might
take you a minute, but how many
approximately funded, vacant,
rank and file, q2 police
officer positions currently
exist in the san francisco
police department?
Take your time.
We'll give you a couple minutes.
While you're looking at that,
how many academy classes were
provided for in this year's
23/24 budget MADAM Budget
chair?
>> total budget of $785 million
out of which that included four
police academy classes.
>> each academy class if fully
subcribed is how many
individuals?
>> san francisco police
department is expected to hire
in the next five fiscal years
each year up to a hundred
police officers.
That was the goal and they have
been falling short not for the
short of budget, but the fact
that they really need help to
have recruitment strategy.
This is the reason why in a
previous budget year this body
also approve a budget that
includes $600 thousand to
provide the police department a
recruitment consultant to allow
them to help with recruitment.
>> so it isn't lack of funding
MADAM Chair, it is lack of
applicants?
>> absolutely.
But we do have good news and I
mean, I don't want to take
words out of the police
department mouth and the
previous fiscal year they only
have six graduate in the police
academy but most recently had
25 graduate police academy
class and lateral hiring up to
30 police officers from other
counties.
>> got it.
MR. Controller...
>> MR. PRESIDENT, ben
roseenfield, the department has
300 vacant funded q2 positions
vacent in the current budget.
>> thank you.
Supervisor preston.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin.
I have comments on this one.
I want to start I will not
repeat some of the points that
my colleague supervisor ronan
made around the impact on
future tax revenue measures.
I will say that while I believe
it was unintentional, I believe
that this effectively this
charter amendment is a were it
to pass is a poison pill on
future general revenue
measures, which would be very
difficult to move forward and
win support of through 2029 if
this measure passes for the
reason supervisor ronan
identified.
I want to articulate some
concerns about the policy
underlying this charter
amendment and those would be
similar comments that I would
have made to the original
dorsey measure and now the
safai measure, and we talked
about a lot of issues already.
I don't want to cover ground
people covered, but the
amendment does-the charter
amendment proposes to do two
things.
It assigns minimum staffing
number undoing the previous
voter approved chapter
amendment that had removed that
minimum.
That's the first thing and the
second thing it does is when a
trigger is met it implements a
mandatory set aside of up to
$30 million per year for new
higher bonuses for police
officers, $75 thousand a head.
Regarding the minimum staffing
number, I think we all can
appreciate people wanting more
efficient and timely responses
when they contact sfpd and in
need and experiencing a
emergency, folks deserve in
this city to have a quick
response and I don't think
anyone on this board -- I hope no
one on the board disagrees with
that rbs I don't think anyone
does and think we also agree
too many of our constituents
are not getting that kind of
response they are entitled to
and should get and it is
necessary.
I understand fully the
frustration among a lot of
constituents that leads to some
of this policy discussion.
That said, there is just no
indication at all and no
evidence that reinstituteing
this minimum staffing number
will fix this isue in any way.
According to the newest metric
staffing report, community
generated calls for service are
actually down in comparison
with similar calls before the
pandemic in 2018.
That informed the previously
suggested staffing numbers.
Why this fact declining calls
for service is totally absent
from the discussion of police
staffing levels when we discuss
this, that has nothing to do
with public safety, nothing to
do with policy, has everything
to do with politics.
And more importantly, simply
playing with theoretical
minimums in a charter amendment
whether the original one or the
amended one does that magically
create new police officers to
the point about that supervisor
walton has spoken to many times
and PRESIDENT Peskin alluded to
around the vacancies.
This police department is
funded for all the staffing
needs and hiring needs and then
some as supervisor ronan
pointed out getting literally
hundreds of millions dollar of
increases and yet they still
lack the officers they say they
need and cannot fill the
academies, so why is this going
to be any different?
there is also a question and
think it is a important one
when we discuss this of whether
resources would be adequately
deployed even if this measure
could recruit and result in the
recruitment of enough officers
to meet the minimum staffing
numbers that are being proposed.
We know that the issue facing
many of our neighborhoods and
many constituents, especially
our low income neighborhoods is
not overall sfpd staffing, but
rather the deployment of
officers and how a department
with a ever growing seemingly
limitless budget and funding,
how they choose to spend their
money.
So, our downtown shopping
district right now is literally
flooded with police officers
and many will proudly tell you
about the plan to flood
downtown with police officers.
You go down there right now,
they are everywhere.
Police officers are everywhere
downtown.
But we can't get in the
tenderloin a consistent
presence of police on blocks
that have suffered repeated
shootings just in the last week
and homicides.
That's not because of shortage
of police officers.
Let's be really clear about
that.
It isn't because of shortage of
police officers.
So, massive police presence
downtown and little effort to
deter or prevent violent crime
in troubled residential
neighborhoods, that's the
realty in san francisco.
Big downtown corporations and
rich neighborhoods get all the
policing they ask for.
While low income high crime
areas struggle for coverage
unless it is part of a made for
tv campaign to arrest people
for their drug addiction and
temporarily move them from
public view only so they can
return later in the day to the
same place and at higher risk
of overdose fatality.
So, colleagues, this is why we
called for and thank you for
the supporting the budget
legislative analyst audit of
san francisco police department
oferntime deployment.
Reforming how the san francisco
police department deploys
officers and are criteria
guiding that exercise of
discretion will do far more to
address the situation then yet
another mound of funding that
comes with no accountability
what so ever.
The second part of the charter
amendment, the mandatory set
aside for hiring bonus is
deeply concerning on many
levels.
Particularly concerning to me
as chair of government audit
oversight committee and as
supervisor ronan mentioned the
gao heard various union
memorandums of understanding
with the city including the mou
with the police officers
association.
Police officers association
overwhelmingly ratified the mou
with the city and mou that
secured another $167 million
for police over the next three
years.
The mou process did not result
in a proposal or include
proposal for hiring bonus after
extensive negotiation with
department of human resources.
They negotiated many things,
including bonuses, they didn't
include the hiring bonuses that
now appear.
The poa and dhr did not propose
the hiring bonuses to the board
during a process that took
place less then a year ago when
the board was asked to approve
and did approve $167 million of
increases as part of a
unprecedented package of raises
and bonuses so don't where the
sudden call for $75 thousand
hiring bonuses on top of all
the bonuses that have already
been promised sfpd is coming
from.
I'm not convinced throwing this
money at recruitment bonus and
new hires in the manner that
would be required by this
charter amendment will have its
intended effect and once
triggered this set aside will
certainly take money from other
crucial city needs and divert
them to the san francisco
police department over and
above the massive budget
increases sfpd has already
secured in successive budget
cycles year after year after
year and through the latest mou.
Colleagues I wish we had a
charter amendment that improved
public safety and addressed the
actual desire of our
constituents for greater
community safety.
This isn't it and I will be
voting no.
>> supervisor walton.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin
and I will not be long in
comments because I have spoken
on this several times in
committee, but I do want to
reiterate that our police
department is already fully
funded, and when supervisor
chan demonstrated that numbers
that have been going to the
police academy over the last
couple years that number 25
which is what the police
department promoted for
recruitment classes was a
number that was dummied down.
A real police academy class is
supposed to require about 50
police officers, that is per
the chief of police and we have
not gotten anywhere near those
numbers, so the issue with the
police department most
certainly is the fact that we
have not provided young people
or people in community with the
excitement about becoming a
police officer.
That has to change if we want
to get a fully staffed
department.
Minimum staffing numbers have
never been achieved
historically.
Give me a date and time when we
achieved minimum staffing
numbers, I would love to see it
because it doesn't exist.
We never achieved minimum
staffing levels, and most
certainly this charter
amendment as presented by
supervisor dorsey and quite
frankly the current one, the
goal of the charter amendment
will never be achieved.
We will not achieve minimum
staffing levels per this
charter, but at the very least,
we should have a dedicated
funding source if that is the
goal and if this is passed.
So, I will be supporting the
amended charter because if for
some reason this was to move
forward, there should
definitely be a committed
funding source for minimum
staffing levels, which are
arbitrary and will not be
achieved.
>> supervisor chan.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin
and colleagues, I think when
supervisor dorsey brought this
introduced it before us the
original version I think I
was-I have a lot of questions
about it, especially as
supervisor ronan has referenced
that we just voted on this as a
city to really undo the minimum
number that was a ballot
measure championed by former
board PRESIDENT Norman yee with
understanding that we need to
be intellectially honest how
many officers do we exactly
need and let's have independent
studies which was conducted by
under the leadership of former
police commission PRESIDENT
Malia cohen and that came
understanding we need roughly
up to 2100 police officers.
It was a study that was issued
MARCH 2022.
Along that time, we recognize
that that was the need for the
city and that is during the
budget the most recent budget
that I supported the total like
I mentioned earlier, a total of
$785 million of police annual
budget that is included four
police academy classes.
During the same time period
MARCH this year, this body also
approved an mou for our police
officers with 10 percent salary
increase.
In that mou also included
retention and bonus for the 5th
year, 7th year and 8th year of
police officers.
With that, it is the reason why
i was surprised when supervisor
dorsey introduced this ballot
measure from the perspective
that we ought to mandate this
with minimum police staffing
when it seemed to me that the
administration and this body in
the last year and a half and
definitely put the money where
our mouth is to continue to
fund the staffing and to drive
toward that goal, recognizing
especially during the $25
million police overtime that we
approve, during that
presentation I asked
specifically the police
department to talk about their
recruitment strategy and why I
know they consistently say they
need to recruit up to hundred
police officer per fiscal year
in the next 5 fiscal years for
the city to meet that staffing
goal.
So, again, I was surprised
supervisor dorsey when he
introduced this ballot measure.
It seems to me though it is
actually speaking volume about
the lack of confidence in our
administration.
That clearly there was lack of
trust at the mayor in her
proposed budget in the coming
years will be able to fund our
police department to meet those
public safety mandates that the
city deserves and I while I
question that, but I do
understand.
I share concern how this
administration our mayor is -- it
is not capable to continue to
be able to deliver efficient
city services, including public
safety.
The reason why that our
constituents frankly especially
in the richmond for us time and
time again we know we are the
least -- actually police station
with the least staffing in the
entire city, we have time and
time again demanded resources
and police staffing and also
ambassadors and yet we did not
hear back from the mayor and
her office to be able to make
that commitment and to so much
later including a murder that
actually have to take place in
richmond market.
And then now leading to this
space where we also facing
budget deficit and we cannot
figure out a way to really make
sure that our city budget is
equitable to insure public
safety, not just staffing for
our police officer, but all
around, firefighters, 911 call
dispatchers and more.
So, with that, it has been
challenging and difficult and
here we are -- I just want to
remind us today though, I think
there are other ballot measures
that I voted in the last few
weeks in support of it.
Not necessarily means that I
completely in agreement with
it, but I do understand that
you know, what we are doing
here today is that we are going
to present this to voters and
have them decide and whether
this is something that we-that
they believe that is the best
way for the city to approach
public safety and many other
related issues we will see in
MARCH ballot.
The reason I will be supporting
this ballot measure today,b
that to actually present it
again to the voters and let the
voters decide.
Thank you.
>> supervisor stefani.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin.
Colleagues, thank you so much
for your comments thus far.
They really helped to solidify
how I will be voting and I do
want to say a few things about
some comments that were said in
terms of policing right now.
Police downtown right now, most
are there on overtime and the
tenderloin station is the
highest staffed station in the
city.
They get the most resources of
any station to deal with the
problems in the issues that are
there and also I just want to
clarify too, the poa asked for
hiring bonus during
negotiations and the city
denied it so wanted to get that
out and be clear on a few facts.
To be honest, the contempt and
bitterness around this vote is
beyond distressing to me.
I find it extremely
unproductive and hurtful to a
lot of people who are just
trying to make a difference and
tackle our most pressing
problems in the way this is
unfolded and ing things said
to one another have been to me
problematic.
I consider san francisco to be
the city of saint francis, I
say it all the time in the
chambers.
I hold myself to the goal to
always try to be a channel of
peace and that means when there
is hatred bring love, discord
bring harmony, error bringing
truth and dispair bring hope.
MAY sound corny to some, but
hasn't let me down yet and
approach today's vote with that
in mind.
I have had to put all the noise
aside with this, because there
is a lot, and ask myself what I
think is the right thing to do
here and what I think get to
the goal in the first place,
more police officers which is
the entire reason this policy
was put forth in the first
place.
I started down this path with
supervisor dorsey because I
absolutely agree with him that
we don't have enough police
officers to address the
concerns that our constituents
are voicing to us on a daily
basis and agree with supervisor
walton when he says we haven't
made it interesting enough for
people to become police officer
jz that is where we also need
to be focusing our efforts.
Public safety as I said over
and over again here is a
baseline obligation of what a
well functioning city
government should do and think
it is crisis we are 600 police
officers short to meet demand
for service.
That is based on a formial
agreed to and approved and
chief scott has routinely come
to this board and has informed
us of.
Like I said, public safety is
foundational.
Our ability to recover from the
pandemic is continuing to be
hampered by the police officer
shortage in a myriad of ways.
It is something I see in my
district every day and
throughout the city, but I
believe we need a fiscal plan
to get there and support any
measure to increase police
staffing without forcing
lay-offs for other essential
workers to pay for it.
911 dispatchers, nurses and
other public safety workers.
I approached this decision with
the same seriousness and focus
I have with previous public
safety matters during my all
most now 6 year tenure in this
seat and really become a pro
taking a lot of serious heat on
my past decisions no matter
where it is coming from so used
to it, but I will always do
quhut I think is right in the
situation.
I consistent ly supported the
police and championed public
safety policy and why I support
the mayor safer san francisco
proposal and despite the
political ferve surrounding
this issue, iment to emphasize
that I will always endorse
proposals aimed at enhancing
public safety.
I have stated too I'm not
inclined to say on housing
issues and other policies and
not inclined perfect to be the
enemy of the good.
My position is consistent with
past action such as refusal to
vote for the 2020 city budget
at a time when I thought was
insufficient funding for police
and struggling businesses in
the middle of the pandemic.
Voting history on police
commission appointees reflect
[Indiscernible] Again, I have
taken other serious votes on
police issues here at the board
that I stand by and like I
said, got me a lot of flack,
but recent incidents in dist
rblth 2 including attack on
muni driver, shootings, retail
theft and first hand experience
like car break in and home
burglary underscore the urgency
to address the safety concerns.
One of the most basic functions
is to insure residents safety
and peace of mind.
It is evident to me that we
have fallen short in this
regard and I am determined to
see tangible improvements.
My priority is to make
decisions that yield what I
think are positive outcomes.
I had concerns with this
measure first proposed due to
the set aside allocation jz
knew it would be a problem
getting through the board.
In san francisco alone, we have
22 baseline set asides already.
That exceeds the total in every
other city and county in the
state combined.
In fact, local governments in
the rest of california have a
total of 10 similar funding
requirements for comparison to
other cities, los angeles has
adopted two requirements, san
diego one, and san jose has
none and that is based on a
controller's report.
Concerns with set asides are
not new to anyone who has been
paying attention to san
francisco politics and in 2008
the voters told us they had had
enough of set asides.
Prop s set a policy back then
which pass said by the voters,
non binding like other policy
statements we are putting on
the ballot in MARCH, that set
aside, this is what proposition
s said in 2008, that set asides
would be voted on only if
paired with adequate new source
of funds so the implementation
of the set aside will not cause
a net decrease in general fund
revenues.
Because set asides limit
discretionary spending it urkt
further constricts our spending
in time of economic downturns
which we all know are on the
horizon.
Total funding set aside for
this budget amount to $2.1
billion out of a total of 4.5
billion in general fund
aggregate discretionary revenue
leaving with $2.4 billion in
discretionary revenue.
That is not a lot out of a $14
plus billion budget in san
francisco.
My point is that, it is hard
when you are talking about set
asides, they are very hard to
legislate, especially here at
the board and not shocking
other public safety personnel
like 911 dispatchers working
double shift get nervous and
feel left out during this
process.
The question naturally becomes
how do we pay for this?
It certainly does not have to
be with a new and future tax
measure.
The language states it could be
paid for by a measure that
amend an existing general or
special tax to dedicate and or
increase tax revenue to support
police staffing and recruitment
at the new minimum levels.
So, we don't have to pass a new
tax for this to be meaningful.
I do want to thank mad,
supervisor dorsey for even
bringing us to this point.
We do have people that probably
haven't agreed to before
publicly that we need more
officers and minimum staffing
will be in the charter with
meaning behind it, not just a
number that someone came up
with and if the voters agree we
know we have to find a way to
pay for it.
my goal would be to redirect
dollars from existing tax which
I think is very doable.
I think that is moving the
needle in the right direction.
I know it isn't exactly how it
was envisioned to begin and
this has been mentioned as a
poison bill but supervisor
dorsey I think you planted a
seed and pushed the board to
commit to doing more on this
isue.
The proposed measure provides
voters with a chance to express
we are not voting on anything
other then giving the voters to
tell us what they think.
That's what we are doing,
putting something on the ballot
for the voters to tell what
they think.
A chance to express whether
they desire more police
presence.
If that's the case, the wheel
work will commence to establish
a dedicated meaningful funding
stream for our police
department and I repeat, it
doesn't have to be a new tax.
We are not sending a tax
measure to the voters today.
I guarantee you, I will be
working oen a way to make
certain we have real funding
streams in place and continue
to vote for more police
officers like I have
consistently done on this board
and that includes figuring out
ways as supervisor walton said
to figure how to get more
police officer tuesday to
come here and be police
officers.
We can vote on recruitment,
retention and overtime and
other ways to bring more
officers regardless what goes
on here and regardless what go
tuesday the voters, we have
jobs to do and focus on the
issue and try to bring
solutions here and now.
Today I will vote in the
affirmative to give voters a
chance to let know how they too
feel on this issue.
Thank you.
>> thank you supervisor stefani.
Supervisor melgar.
>> thank you very much
PRESIDENT Peskin.
And thank you to all my
colleagues for a very robust
discussion and supervisor
dorsey and safai for their
efforts.
I will also be voting yes on
this measure.
But I want to say a up couple
things about it, because it is
not an ideal situation.
My issues with both the
original measure and the
amended measure is that we are
missing a big opportunity that
we could actually be taking up
in our roles as an oversight
body over this department and
so, I will support the argument
that we are under-staffedism.
I know in district 7, ingleside
park and taravel are very under
staffed and we have lost beat
officers, we have lost the
opportunity for community
policing, we have lost a lot of
things that effect the day to
day quality of life for our
residents.
I think both downtown our bred
and better in terms of tax
revenue and the neighborhoods
should be safe.
I think low income communities
which bear the brunt of crime
should be safe.
I think everything should be
staffed properly both the
police and 911 operators and
healthcare professionals and
everyone who makes up the
safety net to have a society
that functions.
Just before the break we
approved a settlement of nearly
half million dollars to officer
who sued the police department
who discrimination because he
is a muslim.
We approved multiple
settlements because police
officers were gay and because
they were women and I think it
is in the 21 century police
force that responds to the
needs of the very diverse and
rich community like san
francisco, which is a
international destination that
welcomes tourists from
everywhere in the world that
speak multiple languages, that
bring multiple life
experiences, we need a police
department that is diverse,
that has language capacity.
Our chief has-it is goal to
have 30 percent women by 2030.
A goal I whole hearted lee
support.
I think we are missing the
opportunity to help the
department meet the goals we
all agree on by putting some
accountability along with the
increased staffing needs and
so, I think that that's
something that neither one of
these versions do, but I think
the amended version gets us a
little closer to something that
I want to see, which is better
staffing on my side of town, so
for that, I will be voting yes
on this, and I hope that
collectively we take up our
responsibility to make sure
that this police department can
recruit and hold on to police
force that is diverse and
responds to the needs of the
community as they are now and
as they will be increasing in
the future.
Thank you.
>> thank you supervisor melgar
on item 18, MADAM Clerk,
please -- supervisor safai.
>> do we need a motion to send
this to the ballot?
>> that is the question before
us, so an affirmative vote is
vote to submit to ballot and
negative vote is not to submit.
Am I correct MADAM Clerk?
Alright.
On item 18, a roll call,
please.
>> item 18, dorsey, no.
Engardio, no.
Mandelman, no.
Melgar, yes.
Peskin, aye.
Preston, no.
Ronan, no.
Safai, aye.
Stefani, aye.
Walton, aye.
Chan, aye.
There are 6 ayes and there are
5 noes with supervisors dorsey,
engardio, mandelman, preston
and ronan voting no.
>> the charter amendment is
ordered submitted.
Next item, please.
>> item 19, ordinance amending
the business and tax
regulations code to broaden the
exemption
from the increased transfer tax
rates when the consideration or
value of the interest or
property conveyed equals or
exceeds $5,000,000 for
transfers of certain
rent-restricted
affordable housing; applying
the exemption retroactively to
transfers occurring on or after
JANUARY 1, 2017; extending the
exemption through DECEMBER 31,
2030; and affirming the
planning department'
s
determination under the
california environmental
quality act.
>> roll call.
>> item 19, dorsey, aye.
Engardio, aye.
Mandelman, aye.
Melgar, aye.
Peskin, aye.
Preston, aye.
Ronan, aye.
Safai, aye.
Stefani, aye.
Walton, aye.
Chan, aye.
There are 11 ayes.
>> MADAM Clerk, why don't we go
to our 2:30 special order
commendations.
First up is supervisor chan.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin.
Today I would like to invite
our in-home service workers up
to the podium.
I don't know if they are here.
But I also see MR.
[Indiscernible] I think I saw
him earlier.
Colleagues, NOVEMBER is
national family care-giver
month and I'm delighted to have
the opportunity today to
highlight a truly exceptional
role and invaluable work of
in-home supportive work
providers.
We are fortunate to have 26
thousand dedicated in-home
supportive service providers in
san francisco who do the
essential work of delivering
high quality care for our
seniors and low income
residents and the majority of
in-home care givers are women
of color and immigrants who
themselves often struggle
financially to provide these
essential services.
Their care and compassion
insures our seniors and people
with disabilities can live with
dignity and independence in
comfort of their home and age
in place in the communities
they live and thrive in.
That is why it is so important
to recognize their work, but
also continue our advocacy to
support these workers and honor
their service by making sure
they can afford to live in the
communities they work in.
I will have a resolution on
today's imperative agenda to
honor in-home supportive
service providers and declare
today in-home supportive
service providers day and I
urge for your support, but we
also have them here today to
accept the special recognition.
I am trying to figure this out.
[Indiscernible]
>> come on up.
[Applause]
>> PRESIDENT Peskin, if I MAY
can I say a few words in
chinese?
[Speaking chinese]
>> [Speaker speaking chinese]
>> I want to be express my
gratitude to all the supervisors
and also of course our workers
here to accept the recognition
the board of supervisors intend
to offer to all our workers.
[Speaking chinese.
Waiting for translation]
>> it is our honor as home care
workers who can serve the
vulnerable of seniors and
disabled in the city.
>> [Speaking chinese.
Waiting for translation]
>> we were very happy we are
able to serve our vulnerable
population, the seniors, the
disabled and do a good job.
We are very honored.
>> [Speaking chinese.
Waiting for translation]
>> and we want to let you know
how happy we are to have the
trust from all the supervisors
on our work.
>> [Speaking chinese.
Waiting for translation]
>> having said that, I have to
reiterate that we are from the
disadvantaged factor of society.
Even with the current support,
we still need to have a longer
term support from all of you.
>> [Speaking chinese.
Waiting for translation]
>> so, in making decisions,
hopefully you all will bear in
mind that when cutting certain
funding or cutting the ihss
program, we will suffer from it
and just to be mindful when
decisions are made on the
budget.
Thank you.
>> [Speaking chinese.
Waiting for translation]
>> we have very difficult job
to do and we are hopefully we
will continue to have your
support.
>> thank you.
>> [Waiting for translation]
>> I want to be here to
represent our home care workers
who say a few words and I'm
very thankful to all the
support and respect on our work
as home care workers.
>> [Waiting for translation]
>> thank you so much.
>> I want to show my gratitude
to the budget committee for
allotting more funding in
support of the ihss program.
>> thank you very much.
Happy in-home supportive
services provider day.
[Applause]
Our next special order
commendation will come from
supervisor ronan.
>> if I can call the legendary
martha ryan to the podium,
please.
[Applause]
Thank you.
Colleagues, today I am
especially honored to recognize
the visionary and inspirational
leader, martha ryan.
Founder and executive director
emeritus of homeless prenatal
program.
In the more then 30 years since
it has begun, hpp has assisted
more then hundred thousand
families to deliver healthy
drug free babies and break the
cycle of paunchty.
Hpp is a shining example of a
program that really works and
profoundly transformed the
trajectory of countless lives.
The story of hpp begain in the
1980 after serving as the peace
corp volunteer in-returned to
africa to work as a nurse.
In those camps martha witnessed
the importance of investing in
communities of empowering women
and providing comprehensive
support beyond medical care for
struggling families.
When she returned she was
shocked by the poverty she
found at home thin san
francisco bay area.
Sadly that poverty still exists
today.
While working at the southeast
health center in the bayview
district, one mentor and secret
between us, his name might be
DR. Dan, just throwing that in
there, the medical director at
the time of healthcare for the
homeless told her shockingly
there were women in the shelter
who were homeless and pregnant
who were not getting any
appropriate care.
Martha in disbelief agreed to
take a look.
When she got thoothe shelter
she found a room with mats
lined up against the wall and
three women at different stages
of pregnancy but not one was
getting care.
People would say that is
terrible, but nobody was doing
anything about it.
Martha immediately recognized
an opportunity to help.
She knew these women needed
critical support, safe housing,
prenatal care and a healthy
diet and that pregnancy could
be a window of opportunity to
change the direction of a
family's life.
Martha secured a grant from san
francisco foundation for $52
thousand and launched the
homeless prenatal project out
of a empty closet at a family
shelter.
In the first year, hpp served
72 clients.
34 years later under martha's
visionary leadership, hpp is a
revered and celebrated program
that has consistenly improved
and are expanded services that
has a $17 million budget and
serves more then 3500 families
per year.
Hpp is widely recognized as a
beacon and national model.
Hpp two generational approach
works upstream to help the
cycle of family and childhood
poverty.
Success lies in marthas belief
to improve life for children
you must see the strength and
ability of their parents by
investing and empower to
overcome their challenges.
Without that empowerment the
children are the next
generation in the pipeline of
chronic homelessness.
Martha vision of empowerment
includes tapping into strengths
and potential of her incredible
staff and listening to ideas
from staff who life experience
tell them what the clients need.
Over 50 percent and this is
truly remarkable figure of hpp
staff are former clients from
the communities that the
organization serves.
Martha, we are just in ah of
you, we are so proud of you.
I want to thank you from the
bottom of my heart for your
incredible contribution to
health, happiness and wellbeing
of countless children and
families.
I'm getting the chills just
saying these words.
You have made san francisco and
the world a better place,
absolutely, no question.
Thanks to your life of service,
activism, determination and
love, hpp will continue to
prosper and be a beacon of home
for generations to come.
Thank you.
[Applause]
>> thank you.
>> before you speak we have
colleagues who want to say a
few words.
I'll turn it over to supervisor
walton through the chair.
>> thank you so much supervisor
ronan and I just have to take
the time to speak about martha
briefly and I don't think you
are fully retired,
[Laughter]
And I'm not speaking just
because you were redistricting
out of district 10, but because
since my early days at family
resource center director I had
the opportunity to watch you,
work with you and just see the
commitment that you put into
making sure that families and
mothers were able to receive
the support that they needed
and you have done it for so
many years.
Most proud about the
reactivation of jalana house
and bayview and the way you
were able to find a place for
young and expecting mothers to
live and be safe and also the
fact you were able to purchase
a building and we work to make
sure it will be hundred percent
affordable housing.
I think that is just a perfect
way to move forward and pass on
leadership to shalina and want
to say thank you so much for
all your work and continued
work with hpp.
Thank you for demonstrating and
being a example.
>> thank you.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin
and thank you supervisor ronan
for this amazing honoree before
us today.
I'm so incredibly lucky to know
martha ryan and I remember when
we first met, I nicknamed you
right away, saint martha,
because I was just in ah of
everything you were doing and I
was lucky enough to be able to
serve on the board of directors
of the homeless prenatal
program for 6 years and I
remember even having my
daughter at the time, I bring
her to the meetings and have
her in the pushing her around
and having babies at the
homeless prenatal program is
something you did.
Those 6 years I served on the
homeless prenatal program board
taught me so much, and they
taught me the -- what incredible
non profit can do and profound
impact non profit like yours
can have on our most pressing
issues, and it all most seems
so effortless in terms of you
wanted to do something, we need
the money and the money would
appear and there was like it is
martha.
Or, you want to do family
planning.
Then it happens and martha
figured it out.
I felt like sometimes she was a
board member.
We are supposed to question the
executive director.
I was like whatever martha
says, I think she can make it
happen.
I was probably one of the board
members that just absolutely
fallowed your lead, but
believed in you and saw every
vision you had became realty
and it just grows and grows
like supervisor walton was
mentioning.
The building next door and how
you want to do housing and it
is just-what I most remember
too is being at the our house
fund racers in MAY and the
people you touch and lives you
turn around and just watching
how they grow and what happens
to their children and of course
my grood friend latifa simon
and how she was once served.
I remember we figured out she
had been served by hpp and I
was on the board and in the
same class.
It is magic what you do and I
will continue to be in ah of it
and learn from it and just in
such gratitude for quhoo who
you are and all the lives you
made a difference in and we
have a incredible new executive
director and can't wait to
continue to work with homeless
prenatal program but martha
there are not enough words to
say how amazing you and a
impact you had on my life so
thank you so much for just
being incredible.
>> thank you.
>> supervisor preston.
[Applause]
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin
and thank you colleagues for
all your words and for
supervisor ronan for the real
summary of incredible inspiring
work of martha.
I just learned I didn't realize
the building had been
redistricted out of d10.
I was over here.
I'm still sad because martha's
personal residents was
redistricted out of d5, so
no -- but, I just want to add my
thanks to you for your
incredible creativity, your
optimism, your years and years
of service to the city and
really inspiring so many other
efforts, not just at hpp but
everything from our work at the
oasis and your history of
showing how you can make the
impossible happen with the kind
of commitment and the kind of
deep respect you have for folks
who are struggling and for
always centering the needs of
those who are struggling the
most in our city, so I just
want to thank you for all your
incredible work.
>> thank you.
>> it is your turn now.
>> it is my turn.
Thank you very much supervisor
ronan and all the supervisors
and catherine for your service
on the hpp board for 6 years.
I remember that time well.
Hpp started in a closet in a
shelter and it grew, it has
grown into a institution in san
francisco.
That happens not because of one
person, that happens because of
a team of committed people
working together to make change
and some of my team, a very
small portion of my team, some
had to leave and some-many are
still working now, but I like
them to join me up here,
because it is they that
actually make the magic happen.
[Applause]
I just want to say that the
strategy as supervisor ronan
mentioned has been a two
generational approach.
We believe in helping mothers
and if you can help -- in order
for the mom to have healthy
babies and children to grow,
you cannot just help the
mothers and cannot just help
the babies and children, you
must help the mothers and so
the children can thrive and
have obtain critical needs.
One of those critical needs is
housing.
Buse we don't see families on
the street, that doesn't mean
that there are no homeless
families.
i guarantee you there are
children learning to crawl in
cars.
I was talking to a staff member
before I left here and she was
doing a group with some
postpartum moms and was saying
so many clients that she says 7
out of 10 are homeless and I
said what kind of homelessness
and she said, they are living
in single room occupancy hotels.
We all know those are rooms
without a restroom, without a
kitchen and it is for the
entire family grows.
It is no fit for growing family.
And we do believe in upstream
work and we need to-we believe
if you go upstream you got to
figure out what it is that is
causing families to fall into
homelessness and poverty and
try to figure it out.
I guarantee you if we don't do
that that the next generation
and possibly the next two
generations of chronically
homeless children, chronically
homeless adults are in the
pipeline now and we cannot let
that happen.
I really challenge all of you
here on the board of
supervisors to advocate for
family housing.
Housing is foundational.
Nothing happens without housing.
Families tell us over and over
again, how do we expect
families to make it if they
don't have a place to live?
We can do better and h prks p
you're right, yes we did
purchase that building next
door to us and on 18th street
in district 9 and what an ideal
place to be able to make change.
To house and support families
in need.
to help them exit poverty and
help them exit homelessness.
Sadly, it does not appear that
families are priority and I
want you all to please hear
that.
We would be nothing if I did
not listen to the families we
serve.
We need to advocate for
families.
Now, I have retired, I really
have retired and it really
gives me the upmost pleasure to
introduce to you today the
woman who you will see a lot of
because she is a incredible
woman and advocate.
She is smart, she cares, she is
committed and she does not give
up when it comes to serving
families.
Shalina estrog.
>> hello board of supervisors.
[Applause]
Hello, honor to be here today.
Honor to formally meet many of
you.
The new executive director of
homeless prenatal program.
I want you all to know this
work we do is real and very
near and dear to my heart as a
san francisco native and as
someone who has had a family
member many family members go
through hpp program.
I know exactly what it means to
be a sf resident and need
services and so I plan to
continue the work martha has
done.
I think it is very easy for me
to-not easy, easy to follow in
martha footsteps.
I don't feel it is filling in
martha's shoes because you
cannot do that.
How do we work and partner
together as a community, as
families, as our staff to make
a difference in the lives of
families and martha said, we
have work to do, so you will be
seeing me and hope we can
partner together and make a
difference for our families in
the city.
>> we look forward to it.
Thank you and congratulations.
>> thank you very much.
[Applause]
>> last but not least, we will
go to district 11 supervisor
ahsha safai.
>> thank you colleagues.
Today it truly is my honor.
I guess I'm getting old.
I have been in this city long
enough I have known someone
over and worked with them over
20 years.
It really is deep deep honor of
mine to honor the incredible
legacy of joe martinez.
Joe, if you could come forward.
The founder and until recently
the executive director of
mission child care consortium.
Joe martinez was born in new
mexico, 1948 but been a long
time san francisco resident and
community leader.
He began working at the age of
14 and when he was 17 year old
part of the youth group called
the mission rebels in the
mission district.
This group helped train
teenagers obtain jobs.
A few years later he started
working at mission language
vocational school, mlvs and
continue service to community
and commitment to help people
find jobs.
We are starting to see a theme.
Joe at a young age giving the
people, helping people.
On NOVEMBER 2, 1970 mayor joe
alioto appointed to the mission
model corporation a critical
group in the mission community
tasked with formulating ideas,
identifying priorities and
setting goals to benefit and
uplifting the communities of
san francisco and joe's case
particularly he was the
youngest board of directors
member representing the mission
community at the time.
In 1978 joe received his degree
in social services from san
francisco city college.
He continued to go to school at
san francisco state and the
university of san francisco and
he decided on serving families
and infants and toddlers.
His vision was to create a
culturally competent learning
environment for children when
led to consolidate 5 child care
centers into one facility in
the mission district, which was
the birth of mission child care
consortium.
I think at the time and this
isn't part of the off script,
but at the time it was a old
funeral home so joe had to
convince all the families it
would be okay to be in a
building where there had been
formally dead bodies.
Joe, met with every single
family member and convinced
them the spirits would be on
their side.
Joe continued to seek another
facility to provide child care
development for the over 200
children being served now in
this child care facility who
needed to go to work, attend
school or continue the training
in their life.
His vision and early commitment
was to provide more jobs for
the community as child care
providers, but also child care
opportunities so people could
continue to advance and then
training for his staff which he
absolutely accomplished above
and beyond many people at that
time.
In 1987, he found a building a
former electrical facility,
electrical workshop, 4750
mission street out in the
excelsior, and embarked on
effort to secure that building
to remodel it and turn it into
a child care facility.
This building is 25 thousand
square feet so it is a really
large facility.
At the time and I'll say this,
I think zoe was a visionary, he
was committed to securing
sufficient space that not only
provide child care and also
able to feed families because
there was a-he put in a kitchen
and facility that could serve
food to families that were in
need, so he was ahead of his
time again on the issue of food
insecurity and he saw so many
families dealing with at the
time.
Freshly made food was a big
deal for joe and as we know,
this has become a big part of
what we tried to provide here
in the city and county of san
francisco.
Additionally, wanted to insure
a playground for the children
to enjoy outdoors, so in 1992,
they officially opened mission
child care consortium and
throughout his leadership joe
continued to secure partnership
with mayor office, children
youth and families to extend
child care and preschool slots
and at the time of his
retirement which was just
recently, he served mission
child care for 42 years at the
mission child care consortium.
It st. Now in 52 year of
operation with over 220
children.
It the largest private child
care facility in the entire
city and county of san
francisco outside the unified
school district facilities.
Thank goodness he continued his
vision and advocacy for
development service because
before he retired he achieved
the goal of helping mission
child care buy their building
and if they had not bought
their building prior to covid,
they would have absolutely gone
out of business.
When I met joe and this is why
I started my speech 20 years
ago I made a commitment to him
when working with mayor newsom
we would help him buy the
building.
At the time they were paying
$25 thousand a month in rent.
Just in rent for their space.
It seemed crazy they couldn't
take the mun money and put it
into a mortgage.
I didn't accomplish it when I
worked for the mayor but when I
elected as supervisor we were
able to finalize with mayor lee
the ribbon cutting and helping
them buy their building and
that was due to joe tenacity
and determination.
Joe I thank you for your
leadership andition have.
You handed your reins to your
daughter.
She isn't as cranky in the
morning as you are.
[Laughter]
But she loves children, loves
the community and just as
committed as you are and handed
the torch to a phenomenal
person.
It really is my honor as your
friend, someone that worked
with you over 20 years to honor
mission child care for the 50
years they have done.
It is couple year past that
time now, and honor you joe for
everything you have done for
san francisco, legacy you built
and the road you paved for so
many people to follow in your
footsteps.
Thank you.
[Applause]
>> thank you.
Thank you very much.
How many non profits make it to
50 years?
It has been a long journey.
I'm proud to have worked for
mission child care for 46 years.
I'm proud to know ahsha.
If it wasn't -- I want to
recognize him, because him and
mayor lee made it possible to
be able to have mission child
care own its building.
We were paying a ridiculous
amount of rent and they wanted
to raise our rent more and
developer wanted to come in and
get the building.
Ahsha you and mayor lee are in
my heart.
I'll never forget what you and
mayor ed lee did.
I remember ed lee's daughter at
the memorial, she said, my dad
woke me up this morning and
said, we got to go help some
children, so get up, we are
going.
And that day when I walked into
his office was just-the day
I'll always remember and he
said, joe, don't worry, we are
going to get that building for
you.
I thank ahsha so much and mayor
ed lee and I want to thank you
the board of supervisors for
this honor.
It is deeply an honor.
I didn't expect to be here.
I thought it was just going to
be a [Indiscernible] Come to
the executive director and it
was going to be brought to the
desk, but it turned out I'm
deeply grateful.
This is a huge honor,
especially after my 46 year s.
Thank you very very much.
[Applause]
>> thank you and
congratulations.
Let's return to our regular
agenda.
Can you please read item 20?
>> item 20, resolution
authorizing the recreation and
park department (Rpd) To accept
and expend
up to $3,900,000 in grant
funding from the california
department of parks and
recreation
for the buchanan mall project;
to enter into a grant contract
with the california department
of parks and recreation that
require, among other things,
that rpd maintain the park as
public open space in
perpetuity; to record a
declaration of restrictions on
the buchanan
mall property designated as
assessor'
s parcel block no.
0748, lot no. 033, assessor'
s
parcel block no. 0757, lot no.
026, assessor'
s parcel block
no. 0772, lot no. 023,
assessor'
s parcel block no.
0781, lot no. 035, and
assessor'
s parcel block no.
0795,
lot no. 028, providing notice
of these restrictions; and to
authorize the general manager
of
rpd to enter into modifications
or amendments to the grant
contract that do not
materially increase the
obligations or liabilities to
the city and are necessary to
effectuate
the purposes of the contract or
this resolution.
>> supervisor preston do you
wish to speak?
No names on the roster, same
house, same call, the
resolution is adopted.
MADAM Clerk, please read items
21-23 together?
>> yes, items 21-23 comprise
three resolutions that approve
three port commission leases.
Item 21, approve a lease
l-17035 with recology located
at pier 96 for approximately
196 thousand square feet of
shed and to approve 252 square
feet of paved land and yard
space which initially generate
$370 thousand revenue to the
port per month for 74 months
and adopt the appropriate
finding.
Item 22 approves lease number
l-17093 with anderson
enterprise inc. Located pier 68
and 70 ship yard for
approximately 116 thousand
square feet of paved land and
approximately 2,000 square feet
of shed space for $67 thousand
for the monthly rent and 3 year
term with three mutually
agreeable one year extension
option s.
Item 23 approve the parcel
lease between port and seawall
lot 337.
>> same house same call, the
resolutions are adopted.
Next item.
>> item 24, sponsors: mayor;
dorsey
resolution supplementing
resolution no. 7-17 of the
board of supervisors to
authorize the
issuance and sale by the city
and county of san francisco
infrastructure and
revitalization financing
district no. 1 (Treasure
island) Of one or more series
of bonds in
an aggregate principal amount
not to exceed $10,000,000
approving related documents,
including an official
statement, one or more
supplements to indentures of
trust, bond
purchase agreements and
continuing disclosure
certificates; and determining
other
matters in connection
therewith, as defined herein.
>> same house, same call, the
resolution is adopted.
Next item.
>> item 25, resolution
approving and authorizing the
execution of a second amendment
to the loan
agreement with sunnydale
infrastructure phase 1a3 llc, a
california limited liability
company, to increase the loan
amount by $1,495,294 for a new
total loan amount not to
exceed $26,567,405 to finance
additional construction costs
for the second phase of
infrastructure improvements and
housing development related to
the revitalization and
master development of up to
1770 units of replacement
public housing, affordable
housing
and market rate housing,
commonly known as the sunnydale
hope sf development
("
sunnydale project"
); adopting
findings that the loan
agreement is consistent with
the
adopted mitigation monitoring
and reporting program under the
california environmental
quality act, the city'
s general
plan, and the priority policies
of planning code, section
101.1; and to authorize the
director of mayor'
s office of
housing and community
development to enter into any
amendments or modifications to
the agreement that do not
materially increase the
obligations or liabilities for
the city and are necessary to
effectuate
the purposes of the agreement
or this resolution.
>> same house, same call, the
resolution is adopted.
Next item.
>> item 26,
resolution authorizing the
issuance and sale of one or
more series of special tax
bonds
for city and county of san
francisco community facilities
district no. 2016-1 (Treasure
island) With respect to its
improvement area no. 2 in the
aggregate principal amount not
to
exceed $17,000,000 approving
related documents, including an
official statement, first
supplement to fiscal agent
agreement, bond purchase
agreement, and continuing
disclosure undertaking; and
determining other matters in
connection therewith, as
defined
herein.
>> same house, same call, the
resolution is adopted.
Next item.
>> item 27, motion directing
the budget and legislative
analyst to conduct two
additional performance
audits in fiscal year (Fy)
2023-2024 on the management of
street cleaning by public
works and of interdepartmental
agreements citywide.
>> same house, same call, the
motion is approved.
>> please read items 28 and 29
together.
>> two resolutions.
Item 28 add said place-making
street signs reading leather
and lgbtq cultural district to
26 existing street signs in the
south of market neighborhood in
the vicinity of the leather and
lgbtq cultural district
generally bounded by branen,
third, mission, 12 and division
streets in recognition and
honor of extensive history and
contributions of the leather
and lgbtq community.
Item 29 adds the street name,
mtt way to the 200 block of
grove street in recognition of
san francisco symphony music
director michael tilson thomas
tru-minds impact on san
francisco and local arts and
cultural city throughout his 25
years.
And celebrate his 79 birthday.
>> same house, same call, the
resolutions are adopted.
>> item 30, is ordinance to
amend the police code to extend
the end date of cannabis event
pilot program from DECEMBER 31,
2023 to DECEMBER 31, 2026.
>> same house same call the
ordinance pass first reading.
>> item 31, resolution to
determine the issuance of
type-48 on-sale general public
premises liquor license to
universal life corral llc doing
business as the stud located at
1123 folsom street will serve
the public convenience and
request that the california
department of alcoholic
beverage control impose
conditions on the issuance of
the license.
>> same house, same call, the
resolution is adopted.
Committee reports, please.
>> item 32-35 were considered
by the land use and
transportation committee at a
regular meeting monday NOVEMBER
27.
Item 32 was referred without
recommendation as amended with
new title and I will read the
whole new title.
Item 32 is ordinance to amend
the planning code to incrjs
housing production by exempting
under certain conditions
specified housing product
fraump the notice and review
procedures of section 311 and
the conditional use requirement
of section 317 in areas outside
priority equity geographies
which identified in the housing
element as areas of or
neighborhoods with high density
of vulnerable populations.
to remove the conditional use
requirement for several type of
housing projicect to include
housing developments on large
lots and areas outside the
priority equity geography
special use district and
projects that build additional
units in lower density zoning
dist rcktd and senior houseic
that seek to obtain double
density to amend the rear yard,
front setback, lot frontage,
minimum lot size and
residential open space
requirements in specified
districts to allow additional
use on the ground floor in
certain buildings and
residential buildings, homeless
shelters and group housing in
residential district and
administrative review of
reasonable accommodations to
expand the eligibility for the
housing opportunities equity,
the san francisco home sf
program and density exceptions
in residential districatess to
exempt certain affordable
housing projects from certain
fees to approve state density
bonus project and make
amendments to other sections of
the planning code to a-mind the
zoning map to create priority
equity geography special use
district to amend the
subdivision code to update the
condo conversion requirements.
And affirm the ceqa
determination and make the
appropriate finds.
>> supervisor melgar, chair of
land use transportation
committee, the floor is yours.
>> thank you so much PRESIDENT
Peskin.
Colleagues, this item has
gotten a lot of press over the
last few months.
It has been a pretty heavy lift
to work with all of the
stakeholders on a matter that
pertains to the processes of
our 7 by 7 square mile city
with a code that is extremely
complicated and that has
evolved over time.
We have been working closely
with our city attorney, the
planning department, the
mayor's office and colleagues
on the land use committee to
come out with something that is
true to the letter of the law
and intent of our housing
element, which we approved
unanimously and also meets the
technical compliance of the
various pieces of legislation
that have passed and signed
into law by our governor this
past year and there are many
many pieces of legislation.
It has been a complicated
exercise.
Never the less, we were able to
send this piece of the
committee report yesterday from
the land use transportation
committee, however 45 minutes
before the meeting started, we
did get a corrective action
letter from the folks at the
state housing development
department and it warns us
about one of the amendments
that we made, so it will take
us a little bit of time to make
sure that we pass what we bring
before you is a compliant piece
of legislation.
In addition, there is another
piece of legislation that
supervisor mandelman will speak
about, which I think is
consistent with the goal of
this streamlining legislation,
which is to maximize the
production of housing units if
we are adding bulk to the
buildings in san francisco.
It is still something that is
moving.
I want to assure all of you
that in terms of the timing,
the first 30 day deadline that
has been made much about in the
press passed on thanksgiving
day.
That was the day where none of
us were in the building and
none of the staff at hcd were
in their building, so we heard
this at the very earliest
possible date, which was past
the deadline and that was on it
27th.
It requires them to issue a
corrective action letter which
they did 45 minutes ago and we
have 30 days to correct, so if
we vote on it today, or next
week that is still leaves us
with the meetings on the 5th
and the 12th to vote on
something and still have a good
two weeks before the deadline
for the corrective action
compliance.
I just want to make sure that
we all understand that we are
within the timeframe, we are
cutting it close, however, this
is a complicated city with
buildings that share lot lines
with a very long and rich
history of land use struggles,
and I think that I more then
anything want to thank my
colleagues on the land use
transportation committee for
all of the work and time that
we put into it.
Supervisor preston and
PRESIDENT Peskin.
Thank you very much.
I'll turn it over to my
colleague supervisor mandelman.
>> thank you very much.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin.
I'm going to make a motion as
chair melgar indicated that I
likely would continue this item
one week.
In her remarks chair melgar
gave a couple reasons for that
continuance but I do want to
thank the chair and members of
the land use committee for many
many meetings where they poured
through a pretty complicated
piece of legislation.
We are doing big things to our
processes with regard to the-my
reason for seeking a
continuance today, one of my
concerns about this legislation
is that potentially it could
end up leading to the
streamlining of monster homes
and demolition particularly in
my district.
That is a concern many
supervisors had and state
senator wiener and I have
sought to address those
concerns through the creation
of cu's.
We are in a era where we are
not-trying to not have as many
cu's and one of the purposes of
the streamlining legislation is
get rid of as many
discretionary approvals we can.
I think there is a way to avoid
monster homes in central
neighborhoods I represent but
we need to amend the
streamlining legislation and to
do that we need to send the
proposal back to planning.
That proposal will be heard at
the planning commission
thursday, so I think it come
back to us for action as part
of this approval next week, but
to do that I would as a matter
of collegial courtesy ask
colleagues give me a week to
try to get my last amendment in
shape for consideration.
>> motion made to continue item
one week by supervisor
mandelman.
Seconded by chair melgar.
To the motion, supervisor chan.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin.
I am not speaking about the
motion, but the legislation
itself.
I just first want to thank the
land use committee for all your
hard work in the last few
months to really make sure this
is right for san francisco in
the context of trying to be
compliant to the state mandate.
I do want to put in context
that I think what we know about
san francisco and housing stock
that we have or have not, it is
the fact that we know that last
year from supervisor dean
preston's request through the
budget legislative analyst
report that we have 40 thousand
empty home units and through
the housing element process
that we know we have 60
thousand approved housing units
in the pipeline waiting to be
built.
We know from supervisor ahsha
safai request to budget
legislative analyst that we
have report that tells that we
have roughly well over 300
below market rate units when
there are sro families living
in chinatown and tenderloin,
yet still cannot afford these
below market rate units and be
able to obtain them and move in.
What we have done as a body
during this time though, which
I appreciate want to express
thanks to colleagues who have
land use expertise, including
supervisor mandelman 4-plex
legislation, supervisor melgar
family housing opportunity
legislation to make sure we
build and also that west side
of the city continue to build.
With that, we also I think as a
city has consistently make sure
and along with board
PRESIDENT-make sure we continue
to build homes, that including
that we recognize that 60
thousand units already approve
waiting to be built.
With that is the reason why we
also supported board PRESIDENT
Legislation to lower
inclusionary
percentage-inclusionary housing
percentage to boost production.
We also put our money where our
mouth is.
In 2019 the city has approved a
$600 million of affordable
housing bond.
In fact this body again also
just approve and put on the
MARCH ballot measure another
$300 million of housing band.
Bond.
We are anticipating to see 1.5
$1.5 billion to come tof san
francisco alone.
A regional housing bond this
coming NOVEMBER in 2024.
Time and time again we are see
we are building and when I
think about the 60 thousand
approve housing units waiting
in the pipeline, that's not
just on one sector of the city.
We know it is mission rock,
treasure island but also know
there is potrero power station,
there is park merced and stone
town.
We are building as a city and
balboa reservoir.
Thank you supervisor melgar.
We are building as a city and
we are committed to build, so
this optic to somehow that the
city is not building I think it
is quite the contrary.
We are building, we are putting
our money where our mouth is,
not just this body, not just
the board of supervisors, so
are the voters.
The san francisco residents
time and time again step up to
support these affordable
housing bond.
What I have found though
colleagues is that the state
law time and time again that it
is not necessarily in the best
interest of san francisco.
What I learned throughout time
that especially in the most
recent last few days perhaps we
saw the correspondence between
our planning department and the
department of housing, state
department of housing
specifically about accessory
dwelling units.
What I identified and in my
time in learning more about
accessory dwelling units in san
francisco, I see the state law
is really driven by developers
and realtors when it comes to
state law governing around
accessory dwelling units and
let me give you a example.
State law in fact prohibit san
francisco to install sprinkler
system in our accessory
dwelling units and that that
again is fascinating to me that
in the time when we have to
deal with wild fire and
learning lessens from maui, we
are yet not being able to
install sprinkler system in our
accessory dwelling units.
The same correspondence I
learned there is also questions
about what I consider collapse
zone, meaning we should allow
space in our rear yard that for
access redwell ing units in
rear yard to allow collapse
zone in the event of earthquake.
These are as I'm told
especially the sprinkler system
instillation is cost
prohibitive.
Therefore it is not allowed to
be installed for these
accessory dwelling units by
state law.
That brings the question that
so, cost prohibitive that means
profit over fire and earthquake
safety and those are the
questions I continue to have
about the state laws that are
imposed upon us today and from
now on.
Quhile while I appreciate our
city attorney david chui former
assembly member, also the state
assembly members at the state
assembly as our chair of
housing committee that come
with a lot of expertise around
housing policy both not just in
san francisco, but also in the
state of california.
I too really am hoping that now
as our city attorney that he
will fight for us and defend us
in the best interest of san
franciscanss.
The reason why a cosponsor
resolution urging him and his
office to make sure that we in
the best interest of san
francisco generally defend our
interest and in negotiation and
conversation with the
department of housing and
community development and from
the state level.
With that colleagues I have a
lot of skepticism with this
legislation before us today,
but most importantly the
continuing mandates from the
state that seems to be out of
the realm of what I would
consider we have done along
with housing elements and what
we have already approved and we
continue to comply and we have
done everything that we can
time and time again to prove
that both in policy and money
that we are in the best
interest of san francisco to
also comply in these state
laws, but it seems like it is
never enough and so I am just
going to stop right here and
just disappointed to see how
this continue to unfold that
how the goal post continue to
move away from us each and
every time when we do our best
to comply.
Thank you.
>> thank you supervisor chan.
Supervisor dorsey.
>> thank you prez dependent
peskin.
I do want to clarify just for
the record that as a matter of
collegeality inclined to be
supportive of the continuance.
If I MAY though just given the
last recent letter through the
PRESIDENT.
MAY I ask the city
attorney-there is a line on
page 3 to safely insure the
city implements this action on
time.
Hcd recommend the board of
supervisors pass the ordinance
without these or additional
substantive amendments.
Is there anything that a
continuance would do to
jeopardize our compliance?
>> [Indiscernible]
>> deputy city attorney ann
pierson.
If you are continuing the item
today it remains in the current
form until next week and at
that point if you wish to take
action on the recommendation or
any action at all you still
have time to do that.
>> okay.
Then I will be supporting the
continuance because I know it
will pass today, but I do
intend to do everything I can
to make sure that we are in
compliance with our obligations
under state law.
I will say the bulk of my
remarks for next week when we
vote on the items, but I want
to mention just in my career
and said this before, I have
seen many times when san
francisco is in the cross-hairs
of other governments or
oversight bodies and when we
have the option of playing by
the rules I think it is good
idea to do so.
I rather san francisco be an
example how to comply with our
obligations under state law
then a cautionary tale how not
to do.
I want to express gratitude all
the work to people who have
done a lot of the work on this.
I know there is a lot of work
involved in this kind of thing
from the mayor's office staff,
the planning department, many
colleagues for thoughtful
amendmentss and engagement.
Legislative aid, madison tan,
but I want to especially
express gratitude to supervisor
melgar who has done a
incredible job as chair of land
use committee shepherding this
through and working diligently
and collaboratively with
stakeholders to preserve family
housing opportunities as a
special use district.
As I think she said in
committee yesterday,
collaborative work goes
unthanked and unnoticed and I
think a favorite statement you
made is that feel you are
always stuck doing the dishes,
which resinated with me because
I hate doing dishes.
I want to acknowledge your work
and the work of colleagues for
all of this.
I will be supporting the
continuance.
>> supervisor walton.
>> thank you PRESIDENT Peskin.
I'm not sure if the question
was asked in committee, but can
someone just tell why we
eliminate developer fees on
certain affordable housing
projects?
Knowing that these fund parks
community programs and other
improvements.
Is there anyone who can answer
that question for me?
Anyone who has a answer to that
question?
I can look at the names of the
sponsors on here.
Mayor's office, supervisor
engardio, -- supervisor dorsey.
Did you hear the question?
Why will we be eliminating
developer fees on affordable
housing projects when we know
they fund parks, programs and
other community benefits?
I can ask a question not to the
motion.
The motion was made.
That isn't how the rules go
supervisor melgar, but thank
you.
>> I think it is important that
we do everything we can to be
in compliance with the state
hcd.
i worry given some of the-this
is a agency that made clear
that it is not messing around
and a former colleague now the
state attorney general is
taking very seriously his
obligations under state law and
has with other jurisdictions.
This is something that I
believe is would make us
compliant with state law, so I
want to make sure we are doing
that.
That's why I am supporting the
restraints legislation.
>> just through the chair, we
have built a lot of affordable
housing in district 10 and
don't give up developer fees,
so I would be interested to
know what are we trying to
accomplish here, because
housing is still being built
and so just given anything to
developer makes so sense to me.
I'll follow up with you and the
sponsors.
>> on the motion to continue a
roll call, please.
>> that would be to DECEMBER 5.
>> correct.
>> dorsey, aye.
Engardio, aye.
Mandelman, aye.
Melgar, aye.
Peskin, aye.
Preston, aye.
Ronan, aye.
Safai, aye.
Stefani, aye.
Walton, aye.
Chan, aye.
There are 11 ayes.
>> thank you MADAM Clerk, the
item is continued to DECEMBER 5.
I believe that is the only
committee report that was
forwarded to full board, is
that correct?
>> that's correct, mr.
president.
>> why don't we go to roll call
for introductions.
>> firsh up to introduce new
business is supervisor dorsey.
>> today along with supervisor
chan introducing a hearing
request of financial impact of
apec of small business,
cultural institutions community
organizations residents and
working within and immediately
surrounding the security
perimeter particularly in the
yerba buena and moscone area.
A few weeks ago supervisor chan
passed a resolution and proud
to be cosponsor of that urging
the mayor and city agencies to
inform residents and vulnerable
communities of security
transportation and service
impacts from apec activities to
prioritize city funding towards
mitigation of impacts on
neighborhoods, small businesses
and vulnerable communities and
protect people's rights to
freedom of speech and uphold
the city -- people's id's might
be checked.
We heard from a number of
small business owner who
expressed concerns from
decreased foot traffic and
revenue to employees not able
to get in and out of the
security perimeter.
From residents we heard many
concerns about access to care
givers.
I want to express approximation
to organizations like soma
pilipinas and yerba buena
community benefit district
tremendous partners in outreach.
I think it bears mentioning
that I want to express
gratitude to state and federal
partners for making apec
success.
This is something I think we
don't have lot of these.
Every 75 years we have a
national special security
events.
There was a lot of-I had a lot
of worry about it, but I think
it went pretty well so thank
supervisor chan for her work on
the earlier resolution.
Thank soma pilipinas director
[Indiscernible] From yerba
buena cbd for the work on the
front lines of these businesses
and residents deserve to be
heard.
I think that will give a chance
at the hearing to hear from
them and we are giving them a
forum to share stories, so city
agencies can be best informed
how to support them and hoping
it will inform agencies and
city partners what we might be
able to do mitigate hardships
if any.
The rest I submit.
>> thank you supervisor dorsey.
Supervisor engardio.
Submit.
Supervisor mandelman.
>> submit.
>> thank you.
MR. Chair.
Supervisor melgar.
>> thank you MADAM Clerk.
Colleagues, today I am
introducing legislation to
allow tenants living in
substandard housing to have a
right of action against
landlords who refuse to cure
life and safety issues.
It will enhance damages when a
child or senior are harmed by
their living conditions.
It will run parallel and does
not supersede action by dbi or
the city attorney.
i know that we all heard
stories about families.
We heard them today from martha
ryan.
Living in unsafe and
unsustainable conditions
because the landlords wont
maintain essential conditions
in their properties.
Peer reviewed research and
common sense demonstrate living
in pour housing conditions
cause lifelong health and
mental consequence especially
devastating to children.
Children living in homes with
laecking roof, lack of heat,
unsafe environment show
emotional behavioral problems.
School absence and stress can
have lifelong learning
consequence and loss of
learning potential for the
parent and the child.
A german study found increase
of 20 percent in doctor visits
for age groups over 64 living
in poor conditions and increase
in early deathss for seniors.
Because low income families
often lack the ability to move
and we have a very expensive
city, they quitely suffer,
stuck in terrible conditions
because they feel they have no
ability to change the
circumstances.
We have the opportunity to
change this and empower tenants
to fight for their rights of
livable housing.
Today more then 20 states allow
tenants to sue their landlords
directly.
Currently in california san
jose is leading the charge on
tenants right of action and I
hope san francisco will follow
suit.
Colleagues, I look forward to
your support to create enhanced
protection for families and the
rest I submit.
>> thank you supervisor melgar.
Supervisor peskin.
>> thank you MADAM Clerk.
Colleagues, on behalf of my
chief of staff suny
[Indiscernible] Beloved
grandfather who passed away
peacefully two weeks ago at the
age of 98 in stockton I like to
adjourn the meeting.
He passed away 10 years to the
month after his beloved wife
also passed.
He was born the 7th of 14
children in kingsbury
california after they crossed
over from their home in mexico
in search of better life.
Began working in the fields to
support his family at the young
age of 6.
Bouncing many different grammar
schools, set up to serve
families of field workers.
Despite hard childhood growing
in poverty and later gangs
retained a fierce sense of
pride and resiliency.
Grandfather remembers a story
how many field worker children
went to school bare foot.
They unleash the children on
the piles and run to scrounge
for the best looking shoes even
two sizes too big.
He would rather have shoes that
didn't fit then those that
looked shabby.
He electsed senior class
PRESIDENT And leftd high school
to work full time to support
family and did not complete
high school degree.
Learned to play guitar from
cousin, taught how to play the
[Indiscernible] And always
hungry to learn skills and
express himself.
Talented artist and did not
lack for arts supplies.
Repurposes scraps of wood,
recycled print and trash for
doodles and paintings.
At the start of world war 2
worked as civilian air craft
mechanic repairing planes.
He served the U.S. Arm y 7th
regiment and participated in
[Indiscernible] Upon returning
to stockton met the love of his
life ann at a town dance and
they later married DECEMBER 30,
1954.
He gave us other love.
His indian motorcycle when-gave
up his other love indian
motorcycle when ann became
pregnant with their firs
daughter.
Attendeded [Indiscernible]
Received his sociology degree
in 1973.
Hijoined the state of
california department of
corrections initially as a
youth counselor to focus on
juvenile at risk intervention
and retired as a juvenile
patrol officer.
He disting wished working with
young men in the california
criminal justice and foster
care system as well as those
exiting street violence and
gangs.
Helped transform countless
lives pazing his own life
lessen to youth in need of
positive role model, those
struggling to escape from
gangs.
Recognize countless honors
including serving grand marshal
for stockton-be remembered as
favorite of grand children and
great grand children.
A kid at heart, happy teaching
his grand children blackjack
and poker and taking to the
dump to serve for treasures.
Playing ballard on his guitar
or telling tall tales and jokes
instd the play house.
I like to extend my sincere
condolences to surviving two
daughters, five grand children
including sonny, 5 great
grandchildren and belovered
sister in law.
The rest I submit.
>> thank you MR. PRESIDENT.
Supervisor preston.
Submit.
Thank you.
Supervisor ronan.
Submit.
Supervisor safai.
>> thank you.
Colleagues introducing
legislation to restore and
expand the homeward bound
program as a permanent program.
Since mayor newsom launched the
program in 2005, homeward bound
helped over 11 thousand people
off the streets of san
francisco and reconnected
family with loved ones at a
fraction of the cost of other
homeless intervention programs.
From 2006 to 2019 on average
over 800 people a year utilized
the program when it was run by
the human services agency.
In 2019 the mayor's office
buried this program deep in the
bureaucracy and obscureed who
is responsible for it and for
running it.
Because the administration
mismanagement of the program
fewer and fewer homeless people
and individuals access this
service and remain stuck on our
streets.
Since then only a fraction of
that number use the program to
reconnect with family.
Yes, this is also has been
influenced by the pandemic, and
the impact of fentanyl crisis
on our homeless population, but
that is absolutely not the
whole story.
It wasn't until the examiner
and chronicle wrote stories
about the under utilization of
the program that this
administration did something to
change homeward bound.
What they did, which is
restores hsa role in the
program did not go far enough
and really back to the future
what was successful in the
program since originally run
the program and did it
successfully.
The legislation is about
providing exit from the street
and also exit from the
permanent supportive housing
system.
Something the city does not
focus on enough.
I want to charge homeward bound
to stand alone program, make
clear quhoo is in charge and
expand access to more people,
including those residents in
the permanent supportive
housing so they can reunit with
their family and loved ones.
We can continue to work on it
not just being what as it has
in the past, a one way ticket
back to loved ones that of
course individuals would be
checked on on day 30, day 60,
day 90 to insure that they are
still supported, but this
program has expanded to be
about transportation and other
services they might need to
relocate back to the
communities from which they
came.
with that colleagues, the rest
I submit.
>> thank you supervisor safai.
Supervisor stefani, submit.
Supervisor walton.
Circle back.
Supervisor chan.
Submit.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT, supervisor
walton.
Submit.
Thank you.
MR. PRESIDENT.
>> go to general public
comment.
>> alright.
Those who are here in the
chamber, please come to the
your right side, let's hear
from our first speaker,
please.
Welcome.
>> [Indiscernible] Invite you
today to watch again what I
said on FEBRUARY the 28th of
this year.
I don't know what happened to
the baby.
Still there going.
But, after you do that, please
understand you are not focusing
on what is important here.
The picture is about fighting
technology here.
Technology especially in
communication is public enemy
number one.
We need to address this.
Be aware of what he is trying
to do to society and around the
world.
San francisco you guys have to
be aware of that.
We already said, stated 9
months ago that it is game over
for these people who have been
weaponizing technology.
Technology cannot create beauty.
That's not possible.
we need beauty north in order
to be happy, otherwise it is
not possible.
It is extreme unintelligence
for big tech to keep working on
artificial intelligence.
This is [Indiscernible] From
big tech itself.
You don't need artificial
intelligence if you are
intelligent enough.
End of story.
Anyway, have a good day.
Please I invite you to watch
the 28 of FEBRUARY what I said
at the time when I said change
the course of whatever, san
francisco at least.
Thank you.
>> thank you for your comments.
Welcome.
>> thank you.
I want to talk about something
I have been talking about the
last couple weeks, couple
months.
Light night I attended the
christmas tree right in castro.
It was nice to see the city of
san francisco come together
last night.
I come in college at north
eastern we studied the twinkie
defense and most know it was
not about twinkies sort of.
The corporation itt owned
wonder bred and twinkies and
international telephone and
telegraph company which started
in 1920.
1977 it was worth $17 billion1
(700) 000-0000 which made
wonder bred and twink ease.
Voice and phone technology a
person or group place in
digital surveillance and that
influenced dan white.
In 1978, there were major
issues overseas and within the
united states after vietnam.
we were in a culture war and
war among ourselves.
When that happens on digital
surveillance it leads to
increase intake of alcohol,
increase of shugry food,
anxiety, drugs and upset and
angry you are easily influenced
under phone and voice
technology.
Just like today there are
issues abroad and domestically
and wars rage and not just in
san francisco people are placed
on surveillance with people who
don't have best interest in
mind.
We need peace, unity and
community and ask the board of
supervisors to convene a
meeting to discuss danger of
voice and phone technology and
immediately take off every
citizen on digital surveill nls
in san francisco.
Meta data isn't new.
East germany used it.
It isn't new, it has been
around decades and I make
myself available to each of you
for consulting on this matter.
Thank you.
>> thank you christopher cline
for your comments.
Next speaker, please.
Welcome.
>> hello.
My name is brenda baros.
We both work at san francisco
general.
We heard you talking about the
budget and so that brought some
things to mind for us like we
heard about the deal for the
land out at san francisco
general where they got for
nothing.
We hear about all these other
things that is just giving away
money to people.
not charging developer s and
things like that.
When you come to us and you
start asking us to give up or
you start asking us that we
should take a little less,
remember we are looking at all
of that stuff.
We are looking at every public
service contract that is
basically giving our work to
somebody else to do rather then
paying us to do it.
$39 million for overtime,
honesty, dph workers are burned
out.
There are a lot of employees
that refuse to do overtime
anymore.
That isn't the solution.
They need to hire people so we
can have people to do what they
need to do, not just pay some
people overtime and everybody
else continue to struggle and
suffer and the clients are the
ones that really suffer.
I work in clinics.
Sometimes you have to wait
month tuesday months to get an
appointment.
That is outrageous.
It should not be that way and
that is because we dont have
enough doctors and don't have
enough staff.
>> thank you for your comments.
>> the world bank has been
producing the pcr test at 2018.
Think about that, this is
everything we have been told is
a lie, a absolute lie.
There is very people on the
radio that are admitting what
this is all about.
There is a guy on k fax monday
at 5 P.M. For 2 hours and
exposing the covid lie.
There are so many lies out
there.
one lie we have been taught is
the earth is round and it is
spinning.
It is actually flat.
Antarctica is not a continent t
is the ice wall around the rim
of the flat earth.
There is no south pole.
It is like a pizza and the
crust is antarctica.
GOD is very very close and we
never went to the moon.
Nasa is bunch of liars.
No respect for nasa.
The reason I try to convince
the irth is flat is maybe that
will make you read the bible
and believe in jesus christ
because GOD is so close.
In the north pole they have
this big black stone that goes
higher then the cloud and has a
magnetic force.
All the compasses point north,
but it is round.
It is actually round.
We never went to the moon.
The whole thing is lie landing
on the moon.
If you ask your pilot the next
time you fly or read the pilot
manual it says it is flat.
It isn't moving.
I was cleaning the carpet of a
guy not long ago and told him
that and said I know, I have
been flying 50 years.
We are spinning on a ball.
You think might need to take a
little consideration.
500 miles a hour if we are
spinning at a thousand 66 miles
a urho, hour, we are not.
We are not.
Jesus is coming back.
We dont know the day and hour.
We know if we care to know we
are in a sabbath year right now.
We are in a sabbath year and
the only process in the bible
is daniel 9 that narrows down
the year that christ would die
on the cross.
It is all related to sabbath
years.
It is still not too late to get
saved.
Repent, call upon jesus
sincerely and we hill save your
soul.
>> next speaker, please.
>> something to pass out.
Jtsds
>> hello, my name is
[Indiscernible] I e-mailed most
of you what this is with a lot
more information.
So, I personally believe that
there is a city hall and county
employee who has been very
transphobic among other things
on social media targeting
transactivist as well.
I'll read I read what I have
here.
If the man is city county
employee the fact he targeted
transactivist for simply giving
public comment and sharing our
opinions with government
representatives that would be
unacceptable to me or any
activist to be retaliated
against by the city government
for exercisers first amendment.
I went to human right
commission but the commission
lost my complaint and told me
they can't do anything.
They suggest I call 311 for
help or try the whistle blowing
phone number.
What would you do?
I included examples of the
transphobic things this person
has shared.
For the record I don't get paid
to be here.
It cost me money every time I
print out these fliers at the
library.
It is also disheartening when
people I thought more
transgender accepting then
colleagues certain colleagues
on the board when they don't
say anything on the transgender
day of remembrance how much
more press do you want
transkids and adults to be.
You want to pass a resolution
on 8 grade algebra.
How about resolution on getting
transkids restrooms so they can
urinate and defecate and do
other regular restroom humanly
things at school?
It is dehumanizing to not have
restrooms at school for these
kids.
Do you care?
>> thank you for your comments.
Next speaker, please.
>> good afternoon.
Subject is rent control.
Two phrases I like you to keep
in your mind when voting on
these issues, demolition is
death, and eviction is death.
Thank you.
>> thank you for your comments.
Next speaker, please.
>> good afternoon supervisors.
My name is jake connor ortega
[Indiscernible] Something funny
I heard earlier from supervisor
preston was that the police are
flooded downtown but none are
in the tenderloin.
As the supervoozer of the
tenderloin he requested less
police and more ambassadors, so
deaths in the tenderloin
wouldn't have happened if the
tenderloin was cleaned up, but
I say I agree with preston
voting it down, safai poison
amendment such a disappointment.
However, before apec I went to
break bred in district 6 and
what blows me away was watching
his treat the homeless he
engages with as if they were
his family.
What angers me is that adam is
truly one of the best san
franciscans I have the honor
knowing and like many residents
and business owners, he and
many others are having to do
the job this board should be
doing, which is keeping the
city safe, insuring businesses
stay here in the city, but
businesses around the city are
constantly suffering from
theft, broken windows,
vandalized and being beaten
down by lack of response they
close forever.
We pay so much in taxes, both
residents and tourists alike
only to have that money be
constantly wasted on fruitless
projects.
And as a insult any elected
official asks us for support
when those same elected push
forward legislation as killing
our city.
No longer are we afraid to hold
those running for office
accountable.
Now, it is already too late for
the board to get sizable
recovery achieved, so for those
who are running for office in
2024 like you supervisor
stefani, we will be holding
anyone who voted in favor of
the [Indiscernible] Thank you.
>> before the next speaker,
I'll just-jay connor, here at
the board when you are in a
board meeting and an item is on
the agenda you cannot speak to
it as you did regarding the
charter amendment.
It is committee you go and
provide those comments.
okay.
Welcome.
>> are thank you so
much:fighter abolitionist and
social justice fighter for me
people and nation to make a
better humanity.
I enjoyed myself today.
A lot of people say why do you
come?
What are you receiving from
coming and sitting in these
chambers?
Myself say to them is that, we
can complain all day about what
is not being done for our
people, however, if you don't
show up how can you complain?
So, I continue to come and
stand.
I was very very inspired to
hear the story of martha and
also joe, if I'm pronouncing
the name correctly.
It is inspiration to myself
because so many issues we can
address.
Myself being cultural
representing the whole of the
person.
So many issues I see that you
are tackling.
I want to speak on one
particular one and that is
mothers and families of
murdered children.
We presented to you about two
weeks ago a document of two
homes in regards that I have
been stating I want to invite
you and we will be coming today
and getting your schedule and
information to see these homes.
It has been brought to the
attention of some here
representing supervisors,
brought to their attention, but
one of my particular partners
he pays $14 thousand a month
for the mortgage in bayview and
there is no place in bayview
for the mothers and families to
go of murdered children.
We want you to be able to come
to hear martha and joe their
homes and their businesses were
also a purchase through by way
of those who care.
We would like you to come and
look at the two homes we have.
It is the only homes we would
be able to have for mothers and
families of murdered children.
Thank you kindly.
>> thank you for your comments.
Any other members of the public
that like to address the board
during general public comment?
MR. PRESIDENT.
>> seeing no other speakers,
public comment is closed.
MADAM Clerk, could you please
read the adoption without
committee reference calendar?
>> yes.
Items 38 and 39.
Unanimous vote is required for
resolution first reading.
Alternatively one member MAY
request resolution on first
reading to go to committee.
>> would any member like item
severed?
No names on the roster, same
house same call.
The motions are approved.
We have one item on imperative
agenda to approve two separate
findss.
>> resolution declarer NOVEMBER
28, 2023 as in-home supportive
services provider day in the
itisy and county of san
francisco.
Recognizing the compassionate
service of ihss provider to
most vulnerable and urge the
state and federal government to
advance qual care and good
jobs.
>> alright.
We are required to approve two
separate findings for a
unanimous adoption of the item
itself.
Supervisor chan, would you like
to make the sunshine and brown
act findings?
>> so move.
>> alright.
Is there a second for that
motion?
Second by supervisor mandelman.
Take without objection and we
will pass the sunshine brown
act findings same house same
call.
Supervisor chan, would you like
to make any remarks oen the
item?
Any members of the public who
would like to comment on this
imperative agenda item?
Seeing none, public comment is
closed.
We will take the item same
house same call.
The resolution is adopted.
MADAM Clerk, please read the in
memoria.
>> today's meeting will be
adjourned in memory of
following beloved individual on
bechalf of PRESIDENT Peskin.
For MR. Mars lina marsal v
espinosa.
>> we are adjourned.
[Meeting adjourned]